Blogpost on recent MQTT changes to improve overall performance (#1775)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: blog/2023-05-11-retained-mqtt-messages-filtered.md

---
author: Jan Bouwhuis
authorURL: https://twitter.com/jbouwh
title: Recent MQTT changes to improve overall performance
---

The way Home Assistant's MQTT integration processes MQTT messages and how subscribes and unsubscribes are performed has changed.

### Updates were made in the way MQTT subscribes, unsubscribes are performed

> Subscribes and unsubscribes are not immediately sent to the broker anymore. Debouncer code was added that will delay subscribes to the broker, and bundle them when more are added within the debounce time. At the point where the actual (un)subscribes are done, the (un)subscribes are bundled in one call to the broker. These changes will speed up the MQTT integration and the startup of integrations that register a lot of MQTT entities, especially when shared topics are subscribed (e.g. to publish the availability). In the MQTT debug logging the `mid` number shows what (un)subscribe calls have been bundled in one call to the MQTT broker.

Reviewer: The comma after 'subscribes to the broker' is not necessary.

Change 'shared topics are subscribed' to 'shared topics are subscribed **to**'

Change 'bundled in one call' to 'bundled into one call'

> Subscribes and unsubscribes are not immediately send to the broker anymore. De-bouncer code was added that will delay subscribes to the broker, and bundle them when more are added withing the debounce time. At the point where the actual (un)subscribes are done, the (un)subscribes are bundled in one call to the broker. These changes will speedup of the MQTT integration and the startup of integrations that register a lot of MQTT entities, especially when shared topics are subscribes (e.g. to publish the availability). In the MQTT debug logging the `mid` number shows what (un)subscribe calls have been bundled to one call to the MQTT broker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Subscribes and unsubscribes are not immediately sent to the broker anymore. Debouncer code was added that will delay subscribes to the broker, and bundle them when more are added within the debounce time. At the point where the actual (un)subscribes are done, the (un)subscribes are bundled in one call to the broker. These changes will speed up the MQTT integration and the startup of integrations that register a lot of MQTT entities, especially when shared topics are subscribed (e.g. to publish the availability). In the MQTT debug logging the `mid` number shows what (un)subscribe calls have been bundled in one call to the MQTT broker.
```

### The way retained messages are processed has changed

> The way how MQTT messages with a `retain` flag are handled has changed. Basically a retain flag is added to a received message when we are (re)subscribing to the broker and (some) retained payload(s) available. The broker will replay these payloads directly after (re)subscribing. Also when the connection was last and we are reconnecting the same behavior is seen. When there are multiple subscriptions that subscribe to the same topic all shared subscriptions are receiving the retained messages. Till this point the behavior does not change.

Reviewer: Change 'The way how MQTT messages' to 'The way **that** MQTT messages'

Change 'and (some) retained payload(s)' to just 'and a retained payload' (there can be only one, and you're already saying it may or may not be there).

Change 'Also when the connection was last' to 'When the connection is the last one one that topic', and add a comma after 'reconnecting'.

Add a comma after 'to the same topic'

Change 'all shared subscriptions are receiving the retained messages' to 'all shared subscriptions receive the retained messages'

Change 'Till this point the behavior does not change.' to 'Up until this point, the behavior has not changed.'

> When another subscription with `shared` topic(s) is added, we will subscribe to the broker to ensure we receive any retained messages for that new subscription, existing subscriptions (that already received a retained payload and were initialized earlier) will no longer receive the replayed retained payload triggered by the new subscribes. This will gain performance.

Reviewer: Change 'we will subscribe to the broker' to 'we will resubscribe to the broker'

End the sentence and start a new one after 'that new subscription'.

Change 'triggered by the new subscribes' to 'triggered by the new subscription'

Change 'This will gain performance' to 'This will improve performance'

> The way how MQTT messages with a `retain` flag are handled has changed. Basically a retain flag is added to a received message when we are (re)subscribing to the broker and retained messages are available. The broker will replay these payloads directly after (re)subscribing. Also when the connection was lost, and we are reconnecting, the same behavior is seen. When there are multiple subscriptions that subscribe to the same topic, all shared subscriptions are receiving the retained messages. Up until this point the behavior has not changed.
> When another subscription with `shared` topic(s) is added, we will resubscribe to the broker to ensure we receive any retained messages for that new subscription. Existing subscriptions (that already received a retained payload and were initialized earlier) will no longer receive the replayed retained payload triggered by the new subscribes. This will improve performance.
> 
> > After replaying retained message the broker will send updates without a `retain` flag even when the remote client published with a `retain` flag, hence we cannot tell if that update was `retained`. See OASIS MQTT Version 3.1.1 spec ([on how the RETAIN flag is used](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc385349265)) and Normative Statement Number [MQTT-3.3.1-9](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718134).

Reviewer 3: I think we can simplify this a bit, maybe:

```suggestion
The way MQTT messages with a set `retain` flag are handled has changed such that existing subscribers are no longer passed retained messages re-sent by the broker as a result of new subscribers subscribing to the same topic. Instead, retained messages re-sent by the broker are only passed to the new subscriber.

The new behavior avoids flooding subscribers with the same retained message over and over and is also better aligned with the MQTT specification, see OASIS MQTT Version 3.1.1 spec ([on how the RETAIN flag is used](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc385349265)) and Normative Statement Number [MQTT-3.3.1-9](http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/os/mqtt-v3.1.1-os.html#_Toc398718134).
```
